You know you should
===================

This chapter is philosophical and theoretical about backups.
It discusses why you should back up, various concepts around backups,
what kinds of things you should think about when setting up backups
and what to do in the long term (verification, etc). It also discusses
some assumptions Obnam makes and some constraints it imposes.

Backup concepts
---------------

This section covers core concepts in backups, and defines some
terminology used in this book.

**Live data** is the data you work with or keep. It's the files on
your hard drive: the documents you write, the photos you save, the
unfinished novels you wish you'd finish.

Most live data is **precious** in that you'll be upset if you lose it.
Some live data is not precious: your web browser cache probably isn't,
for example. This distinction can let you limit the amount of data
you need to back up, which can significantly reduce your backup costs.

A **backup** is a spare copy of your live data. If you lose some
or all of your live data, you can get it back ("**restore**") from
your backup.  The backup copy is, by practical necessity, older than
your live data, but if you made the backup recently enough, you won't
lose much.

Sometimes it's useful to have more than one old backup copy of your
live data.  You can have a sequence of backups, made at different
times, giving you a **backup history**. Each copy of your live data
in your backup history is a **generation**. This lets you retrieve a
file you deleted a long time ago, but didn't realise you needed until
now. If you only keep one backup version, you can't get it back,
but if you keep, say, a daily backup for a month, you have a month
to realise you need it, before it's lost forever.

The place your backups are stored is the **backup repository**. You can
use many kinds of **backup media** for backup storage: hard drives,
tapes, optical disks (DVD-R, DVD-RW, etc), USB flash drives, online
storage, etc. Each type of medium has different characteristics:
size, speed, convenicence, reliability, price, which you'll need to
balance for a backup solution that's reasonable for you.

You may need multiple backup repositories or media, with one of
them located **off-site**, away from where your computers normally
live. Otherwise, if you house burns down, you'll lose all your
backups too.

You need to **verify** that your backups work. It would be awkward to
go to the effort and expense of making backups and then not be able
to restore your data when you need to. You may even want to test
your **disaster recovery** by pretending that all your computer stuff
is gone, except for the backup media. Can you still recover? You'll
want to do this periodically, to make sure your backup system keeps
working.

There is a very large variety of **backup tools**. They can be
very simple and manual: you can copy files to a USB drive using
your file manager, once a blue moon. They can also be very complex:
enterprise backup products that cost huge amounts of money and come
with a multi-day training package for your sysadmin team, and which
require that team to function properly.

You'll need to define a **backup strategy** to tie everything
together: what live data to back up, to what medium, using what
tools, what kind of backup history to keep, and how to verify
that they work.

Backup strategies
-----------------

This section discusses things that should be considered when defining
a backup strategy. It includes risk analysis, risk vs cost balancing,
etc. More from <http://blog.liw.fi/posts/backups-3/> and
<http://blog.liw.fi/posts/backups-4/>.

Backup storage media considerations
-----------------------------------

This section discusses possibilities for backup storage media, and
their various characteristics, and how to choose the suitable one
for oneself.

Glossary
--------

* **backup**: a separate, safe copy of your live data that will remain
  intact even if the primary copy gets destroyed, deleted, or wrongly
  modified
* **corruption**: unwanted modification to (backup) data
* **disaster recovery**: what you do when something goes wrong
* **generation**: a backup in a series of backups of the same live
  data, to give historical insight
* **history**: all the backup generations
* **live data**: all the data you have
* **local backup**: a backup repository stored physically close to the
  live data
* **media**, **backup media**, **storage media**: where a backup
  repository is stored
* **off-site backup**: a backup repository stored physically far away
  from the live data
* **precious data**: all the data you care about; cf. live data
* **repository**: the location where are backups are stored
* **restore**: retriving data from a backup repository
* **strategy**, **backup strategy**: a plan for how to make sure your
  data is safe even if the dinosaurs return in space ships to re-take
  world now that the ice age is over
* **verification**: making sure a backup system works and that data
  actually an be restored from backups and that the backups have not
  become corrupted
