% Backups with Obnam
% Lars Wirzenius

Introduction
============

This is the manual for Obnam, a backup tool.

You know you should
===================

This chapter is philosophical and theoretical about backups.
It discusses why you should back up, various concepts around backups,
what kinds of things you should think about when setting up backups
and what to do in the long term (verification, etc). It also discusses
some assumptions Obnam makes and some constraints it imposes.

Installing Obnam
================

I really don't want to write this chapter, so I'll stick to just
telling people using Debian or Ubuntu how to install it with the
package manager, and how to build and install it from source. I expect
this chapter will get patches from various distros and operating
systems to explain their installation details.

A quick tour of Obnam
=====================

This chapter is an extended copy of the tutorial currently at
liw.fi/obnam/tutorial.

Backing up
==========

This chapter discusses how to set up a backup repository, and running
your backup for the first time, plus how to do incremental backups. It
also shows how to look at the backups you've made so you have some
confidence the backups happened.

Restoring from backups
======================

This chapter discusses how to restore data from any backup generation,
either everything or individual files. It describes both the approach
using just Obnam, and the approach using the FUSE filesystem.

Forgetting old backup generations
=================================

This chapter will discuss how to remove old backup generations, and
various considerations on the aspects of what to keep and for how
long.

Obnam configuration files and settings
======================================

This chapter is a reference manual for all the configuration settings
in Obnam, and what their meaning is, and what their sensible use is,
including examples and everything. It also explains configuration file
location and syntax, with examples.

Sharing a repository between multiple clients
=============================================

This chapter discusses what needs to be done to share a backup
repository between clients, and why that might be useful, and when not
to do that.

Using encryption
================

This chapter discusses how to encrypt the backup repository, and how
to manage encryption keys.

Other stuff
===========

This chapter discusses topics that do not warrant a chapter of their
own, such as compressing backups.

Case studies
============

This chapter goes through, in some detail, some typical use cases for
backups. For case, it discusses the data being backed up, and explains
choices of backup strategy, storage, etc. Some case studies:

* Single laptop user, typical data of documents, photos, music,
  backing up to a USB hard drive.
* A VPS or similar server, with web pages, e-mail, and maybe other
  data, backed up to another server.
* A small company with a number of laptops and desktops, a local file
  server, a rented co-lo server, backing up to a rented server in a
  co-lo and to a rotated set of large USB drives.

Troubleshooting
===============

This chapter discusses how to debug problems with Obnam. It covers
things such as log files, various levels of logging and tracing, and
common problems with Obnam use.
