Verifying backups
=================

It's 9 in the evening. Do you know if your backups work? Do you know
when you last made a successful backup of all of your data? Do you
know whether you can restore from that backup? If not, how well can
you sleep?

You should verify your backups, and do it regularly, not just when you
first set up the backup system. Verification means doing whatever you
need to do to ensure all of your precious data has been backed up
and can be correctly restored from the backups.

The simplest way to do that is to restore all your data, and compare it
with your live data, and note any differences. That requires you have
enough free disk space to restore everything, but it's almost the
only way to be really sure.

It's also a great way to ensure the restoring actually works. If
you don't test that, don't expect it'll workd when needed.

If you have the disk space to do a complete restore, doing so is a
great way to excercise your disaster recovery process in general.
Here's one way of doing it:

* On your main computer, do a backup.
* On a second computer, perhaps borrowed for this, restore all your data,
  without using your main computer at all.
* Start using the restored data as your live data. Do real work,
  and do all the things you normally do. Pretend your main computer
  was eaten by your pet shark.
* If you notice something missing, or being corrupt, or being too old,
  get the files from your main computer, and fix your backup process so
  that the next time you won't have that problem.

How often should you do that? That, again, depends on how you feel about
your data, and how much you trust your backup tools and processes. If
it's really important that you can recover from a disaster, you need to
verify more frequently. If data loss is merely inconvenient and not
life-changingly disastrous, you can verify less often.

In addition to restoring data, Obnam provides two other ways to
verify your backups:

* `obnam verify` is like `obnam restore`, except it compares the
  backed up data with live data, and reports any differences.
  This requires you to trust that Obnam does the verification
  correctly.
* `obnam mount` lets you access your backed up data as if it were just
  a directory. You can then use any tool you trust to compare the
  backed up data with live data. This is very much like doing a
  restore, since the comparison tool will have to extract all the data
  and metadata from the backup; it just doesn't write it out.

Both of these approaches have the problem that they compare a backup
with live data, and the live data may have changed after the backup
was made. You need to verify all differences manually, and if the live
data changes frequently, the can be a large number of wrong reports.
